As you know, I'm on the
pill, so here is your copy
of the prophylactic waiver.
Well, looks like we
have a deal here.
I'm looking forward
to consummation.
Excellent.
Thank you.
This is Donna
Pinciotti, and this
is how Donna ended
up during That
'70s Show's abysmal
final season.
Hi, honey.
Thank you for the
postcard with the monkeys.
I'm still bananas about you too.
Over the course of
the eight seasons
that the show
dominated airwaves,
Donna was developed
into one of the most
interesting and endearing
characters on TV
and then completely
kneecapped during the show's
legacy-tarnishing slalom
towards its ultimate conclusion.
Before we get too deep
into today's episode,
please like and subscribe to
Nerdstalgic for more videos
just like this one.
Laura Prepon's Donna
Pinciotti might not
be the first character you
think of when you picture
the cast of That '70s Show.
But on a closer
look, she really is
one of the breakout characters.
Well hey Eric, don't you
want your balls back?
OK, now look.
That's a little uncalled for.
Oh, yeah.
Thanks.
Culturally, she was
just overshadowed
by Fez's cartoonish accent.
Michael, rub oil on my
thighs while I spank you.
Or Kelso's idiotic
comedic sensibilities.
You got a permanent.
So that's permanent?
In fact, most of the
characters on That '70s Show
had clearly defined narrative
real estate that they lived in.
But Donna was a bit
more loosely defined
early on in the
show, which gave her
more room to grow and change.
Donna was literally
and figuratively
the girl next door in the show,
but she was also so much more
than that.
She was a complicated person
with a distinct background
viewpoint and wry
sense of humor.
Oh, believe me, Donna.
I'd love to go, but
Red said I can't, and--
well, he can kick my ass, so--
Eric, I can kick your ass.
We also got to witness
Topher Grace's Eric Forman
grow and mature through his
relationship with Donna.
They complemented each other and
yet were also polar opposites.
That was the joy of the
early seasons of the show,
seeing these two
seemingly unlikely lovers
bounce off of each
other and learn
and grow from their mistakes.
This dynamic, and all
of its complexities,
are laid out in the
show's inaugural episode,
the climax of which is Donna
and Eric Forman sitting
on the hood of a
flashy Vista Cruiser
that Eric's father explicitly
told him not to take out
of town, and yet, thanks to
Donna's encouragement, Eric
and the gang use the car to
attend a Todd Rundgren concert.
Coming down off the high of
this youthful rebellion, Donna
and Eric bond, simmering
with romantic tension.
In some ways, Donna is presented
as the manic pixie dream girl
trope, but Prepon's performance
is so self-assured and nimbly
humorous that the rote
elements of her roll's
initial characterization
pale in comparison
to the magic on the screen.
The pilot climaxes with the
quintessential high school
moment--
Eric Forman not
seizing the opportunity
and going in for the kiss.
So what does Donna do?
She chooses to take
the initiative,
sealing their burgeoning romance
with a single good night kiss.
What was that for?
I just wanted to see
what it was like.
What was it like?
You were there.
Under normal sitcom
narrative construction,
this would have happened
dozens of episodes
and countless seasons
into the run of a show.
The Office took four seasons
to finally get Jim and Pam
together.
For New Girl, it
took six seasons
to finally seal the
deal with Nick and Jess.
A normal sitcom wants to
build an emotional investment
in the two leads'
emotional dynamic
prior to eventually
getting them together.
This is the pilot
of That '70s Show.
We understand from
the jump that Donna
isn't going to be your
average love interest.
She's going to be an
equal partner in the show
as it develops.
And over the first season,
we see countless examples
of Donna's complexities
and intricately
woven emotional life
written across the series.
Like in episode seven of
the first season where
Donna chooses to sing and
dance the night away with Eric,
recreating the ABBA
music they just
witnessed together as a means
of helping them both evolve.
Donna and Eric quickly become
the central narrative nucleus
that the show revolves around.
They are the emotional
heart of the program.
The show does a masterful
job of illustrating
why someone in Donna's position
needs, enjoys, and loves
someone like Eric Forman.
It all stems back to her
relationship with her parents--
Bob and Midge.
Midge is a free spirit, and
Bob is more of a loud out there
ladies man.
Midge ends up
leaving Bob since she
was unhappy with
being a housewife,
and Bob subscribed to more
of the man of the house
sensibilities of the time.
When Donna sees in Eric is the
exact opposite, a progressive
with a non-threatening physique
and an intricate knowledge
of Star Wars, and this
is charming to her.
Donna goes through five
seasons of characterization.
She has ups and downs,
break ups with Eric,
starts dating Luke Wilson's
Casey Kelso in season four--
Come here little guy.
OK.
All right.
Good to see you.
OK.
OK!
All right!
OK.
Then in season five gets
back together with Eric
and we see how much they've
matured but are stronger
together.
Despite the fact that
Donna is in control
for much of her
relationship with Eric,
the later seasons seem to lose
the thread with her character.
In season five,
they get engaged.
However, Eric stands Donna
up on the wedding day only
to return saying he was scared.
All I knew was that I--
Donna, I think we were about
to make a huge mistake.
I'm sure there's a good
version of this storyline that
painted Donna in an
empowering light,
but it just feels
weird and wrong
that the show is doing
all of this to her
and that she's not the person
dictating how things turn out.
Because that's been basically
her role the entire show.
This goes all the way back to
the pilot when she's the one
to initiate that first kiss.
During season seven, Topher
Grace and Ashton Kutcher
were negotiating
to leave the show
to pursue other opportunities,
and by the time season
eight rolled around, the
narrative runway was already
out from underneath the show.
Because Topher Grace
wasn't going to be there,
Eric Forman had decided
to take a gap year
and move to Africa,
leaving Donna in the lurch
despite the fact that she had
deferred her college choices
in order to be with him.
Kelso is also only in five
episodes of the final season.
It's just a train wreck.
The idea of Eric hurting
Donna in this way
is counter to both of the
establishing characters.
Him doing it violates the exact
reasons why she loves him.
Therefore, in later
episodes where he returns,
she would never take him back.
It's very apparent from the
beginning of season eight
that the showrunners did not
know what to do with Donna.
They were trapped
into only viewing her
through the Eric-shaped
box they had put her in.
After initially trying
to introduce a new Eric
stand in named Charlie, they
wrote him out of the show.
Therefore Josh Myers was
cast as Randy Pearson.
The showrunners decided
to introduce Randy
as equal parts Eric and Kelso.
He could fill the narrative
shoes of both of them
but also be presented as
a potential love interest
to Donna, which is as
horrible as it sounds.
Randy's whole thing is that
everyone thinks he's perfect.
Even Red likes him.
They taught me how to play
their games of chance.
Donna, must be nice to
finally have a boyfriend who
can swing that sledgehammer
and hit that little black thing
past-- seriously hit it.
And so that has to mean
that Donna would immediately
fall in love with him.
Right?
It's not like there's seven
previous seasons where
we learn that Donna
doesn't want to be
with an over the top
ladies man like her father.
Season eight just nerfs all of
Donna's character development.
Even early on in the season
when Eric is in Africa
and he's regularly calling
his mother on the telephone,
he never calls Donna.
So I asked Mrs.
Foreman is he OK,
and she said yeah, because
he called her last night.
She even stays up through the
night in one episode waiting
for him to call, even
though he doesn't.
In a season filled
with terrible ideas
like Jackie and Fez
should get together
and what if Hyde
marries a stripper,
the way Donna is treated is
both the most subtly horrible
and the most frustrating.
He had to run the class.
So I'm going to go grab a beer.
Following closely behind
the incomprehensible Donna
and Randy romance storyline
for strangest subplot
involving Donna ever is
the running narrative
all throughout the
final season that
sees Kitty and Donna become
estranged due to some mutually
misplaced anger.
This doesn't seem like anything
that would ever happen.
Donna might as well be Kitty's
daughter at this point,
and the whole season still
takes place in their basement.
Having Kitty and
Donna be estranged
but then having her in
the basement every episode
feels forced and wrong.
And to top it all off, their
big reconciliation in the finale
just feels completely
hollow and unearned.
Like everything in
season eight, it just
happens because it
apparently needs to happen.
By the final episode
of the season,
when Eric finally returns and
he and Donna get back together,
it's too little too late.
The show has just belly flopped,
dragged Donna through the mud,
and completely ruined the
beautifully unique character
that it spent all of
that time developing.
It's really a shame
how That '70s Show
took one of the best and most
tightly plotted characters
and then just said what
if she dated Randy.
Well, that's all we have today.
If you liked this
episode, please comment
down below what you'd
have done with Donna
to fix her character.
And as always, like,
comment, and subscribe
to Nerdstalgic for more
videos just like this.